Hey, i am Oguz,
and in this presentation, I will talk about
SIMD operations in WebGPU for machine learning.
Slide 2.
slide-2
This is a high level presentation
that doesn't go into too much technical detail.
slide 3.
slide-3
Subgroups are subdivision of threadgroups:
they're also named as SIMDgroups, warps, and waves
and their operations can make sharing
and reducing data across threads in a subgroup
measurably faster and
we can have these operations in WebGPU shading language.
slide 4.
slide-4
It is fast to share data between threads in a threadgroup
thanks to shared memory
but it is faster to share data between threads in a subgroup
because they don't even have to go to shared memory.
Slide 5.
slide-5
The desire is containing as much sharing and calculation
as possible in these SIMD32 blocks and
subgroup operations are a great way to do that.
Slide 6.
slide-6
Subgroup operations reduce runtime and power consumption
which can have critical impact on exploratory data analysis,
model fine tuning, and edge inference applications
but besides, subgroups also bring
an intuitive mapping to hardware for algorithms
because GPUs have no atomics or advisable locking mechanism
for floating point numbers,
at least one that will get exposed in WebGPU.
Slide 7.
slide-7
Subgroup operations in WebGPU shading language are
compute stage only, active threads only
and have a non-uniform execution model.
Slide 8.
slide-8
The meaning of active threads here is
in case of a divergence inside a subgroup,
the operations provided will only execute across threads
that can make to these operations together.
Slide 9.
slide-9
Let's get started with the basic operations:
subgroup_size gives us the number of threads in a subgroup,
invocation index gives us the index of our thread inside subgroup,
and subgroupIsFirst gives us whether
we are the first invocation among the active threads.
Slide 10.
slide-10
subgroupAll returns true to all invocations
in case all invocations provided with true and
-Any returns true in case at least one invocation provides true.
Slide 11.
slide-11
Arithmetic operations essentially provide you with reduction,
addition across invocations, multiplication, minimum, maximum,
“and”, “or”, “exclusive or”,
but it is important to note that
these operations will take place across active threads
and they can, besides scalar numerical values,
they can take vectors too.
Slide 12.
slide-12
Prefix operations provide us with
the summation or multiplication of invocations
with an index less than the one we are inspecting.
Slide 13.
slide-13
subgroupBallot returns a bitfield
where the bit is one in the corresponding invocation
in case the invocation provided true to the ballot operation
and subgroupBroadcastFirst broadcasts the value
in the first lane, the first active lane to rest of the invocations.
Slide 14.
slide-14
On desktop, subgroup operations are available everywhere
at least the target of WebGPU
and on the mobile, most of the next generation chips support them.
Slide 15.
slide-15
Technically subgroup operations can make it into MVP
as a good addition in the standard library of WebGPU shading language
because the raised concerns mostly fall out of scope
for this PR and not blockers for adoption as is.
Slide 16.
slide-16
Thanks and you can check the PR itself to see more
and reach out to me for anything related to subgroups.
Have a nice and healthy day!